Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on alpha numeric series.
Let's unpack the mystery of
this concept without needing a
PhD or a panic attack concept.
Explanation.
Alpha numeric series, my friend,
is quite simply a sequence.
Think of it like a secret code
made up of a delightful combination
of letters, numbers, and symbols.
These elements aren't
just thrown in randomly.
Oh no.
They're arranged in a very particular
pattern, and our main mission
should you choose to accept it, is
to identify that clever pattern.
Why?
Well, to either find a missing element,
figure out an element's precise position,
or just answer general questions
based on how everything is arranged.
This whole exercise you see is a
fantastic way to test your ability
to observe, analyze and quickly
spot those logical relationships.
It's like being a detective, but
for patterns, real world relevance.
Now, why is this important for
you, my friend, aiming for those?
Coveted positions.
As someone aspiring to be an officer,
you'll constantly need to quickly
analyze and interpret data patterns.
Imagine sifting through financial
reports or heaps of customer information.
This topic, alpha numeric series,
seriously enhances your pattern
recognition skills, which are absolutely
crucial for efficient data handling,
and of course, brilliant problem
solving in all banking operations.
So it's not just for the exam,
it's for your future desk job, too.
Breakdown of question types based
on past exam patterns for your
exam's, reasoning ability section.
We see a few reoccurring question
formats for alpha numeric series.
First up, we have the mixed
series questions, which make up a
good 40 to 50% of the questions.
These present a series with a real
mix of letters, numbers, and symbols.
You'll be asked to identify elements
based on their position from a specific
end count elements with certain
properties, or even find elements
nestled between two given elements.
Then around 20 to 25% are
letter series questions.
These focus solely on a sequence of
letters, often based on their alphabetical
position, maybe some skipped letters,
or even a clever combination of these.
Don't worry, we'll master them.
Following closely, about 15 to
20% are number series questions.
These involve sequences of numbers
where the pattern might be an
arithmetic progression, like a
simple addition or subtraction, a
geometric progression, multiplication
or division, prime numbers, squares,
cubes, or even a mix of operations.
The numbers can be quite playful.
Less frequent, but still important
are symbol series questions,
making up about five to 10%.
These involve patterns related
specifically to symbols, their
positions, or how they transform a bit
like understanding hieroglyphs, but.
Easier, and then it's the classic odd
one out question, making up five to 7%.
Here you are given a set of elements,
usually four or five, and your
job is to identify that cheeky
element that simply doesn't follow
the same patterns as the others.
It's like finding the
black sheep in the family.
Lastly, a minor type,
about three to 5% are.
Coding decoding based series in these,
the series might follow a specific
coding decoding rule that you, my
smart friend will need to decipher.
It's like being a secret agent, but with
a pen and paper formulas and tricks.
All right, let's talk about some
nifty formulas and tricks that
will make your life much easier.
First alphabetical positions.
It's super important to know these
by heart, like your own name.
We have forward positions
A equals one B equals two.
All the way to Zed equals 26, and
equally important are reverse positions.
Zed equals one y equals
two down to a equals 26.
For quick forward referencing,
remember our good friend EJOT.
That's e equals five J equals 10 O
equals 15 T equals 20 y equals 25.
It's like a five star hotel for
your brain and for quick reverse
referencing, think V-Q-L-G-F.
That's v equals five.
Q equals 10 L equals 15
G equals 20 F equals 25.
When counted from the reverse.
Practice these.
They're game changers
for pattern recognition.
Always be on the lookout for numbers.
Check for common differences or ratios.
Are they squares, cubes,
prime numbers, or perhaps an
alternating pattern for letters.
Check for skipped letters.
Simple alphabetical, order forward or
reverse, or even vowel consonant patterns.
They love to play hide
and seek with these.
And for pair identification, especially
when asked about pairs of letters with
as many letters between them, as in
the English alphabet, the trick is to
systematically check all possible pairs.
Don't rush, be methodical,
like a good tailor.
Methods of solving.
Now how do we actually
tackle these problems?
Let's talk about the methods.
First up, direct observation and counting.
Simple yet effective.
Read the given series super carefully.
Identify the specific elements involved.
Are they letters, numbers, or symbols?
For position based questions,
you've got to count accurately
from the specified end.
Be it left or right, and for questions
involving between, remember to
count only those elements that fall
exclusively between the two given points.
Don't count the end points themselves,
just the ones chilling in the middle.
Next we have pattern identification,
which is crucial for finding missing
terms or the odd one out for numbers.
Calculate the differences
between consecutive terms if
the differences are constant.
Congratulations.
You found an arithmetic progression.
If the differences form a
pattern themselves, like squares,
cubes, or an increasing or
decreasing series, identify that.
Also, always keep an eye
out for multiplication or
division patterns for letters.
Note the position of each
letter in the alphabet.
Check the difference in positions
between consecutive letters.
C, if letters are being skipped,
for example, ACO CCO e clearly
implies skipping one letter.
Observe if the pattern involves
vowels, consonance, or maybe a reverse
alphabetical order for symbols.
Look for repetition, alternation
with other elements or a very
specific sequence of symbols.
And for Mix series, the best approach
is to analyze each type of element
letter number symbol separately
for its pattern within the series.
Or sometimes they form neat
little groups like a one hash.
B, $2 C 3%, and you need
to spot that group pattern.
Then there's a rearrangement
transformation analysis.
If the question asks you to
rearrange the series, for instance,
if all numbers are dropped.
Then you mentally, or by quickly
jotting it down, need to create that
new series first and then apply your
counting or pattern identification
methods to this new transformed series.
It's like giving the series a
makeover before you judge it.
Shortcuts and smart techniques.
Time for some smart
techniques, my friends.
First, visualize the series.
Don't just read it mentally, picture it,
or quickly jot down a simplified version.
Your brain works wonders with visual aids.
Next, divide and conquer.
For those really long or complex
series, don't get intimidated.
Break it down into
smaller, manageable chunks.
Or analyze the patterns of letters,
numbers, and symbols independently.
It's like eating an
elephant one bite at a time.
Count carefully.
This cannot be stressed enough.
When you are asked to count
elements from an end or between
elements, be absolutely precise.
Mark the elements as you count
to avoid those pesky errors.
A small mistake here can cost you marks.
Remember, direction matters.
Always pay super close attention
to whether you need to count from
the left end or the right end.
Left typically means the beginning
of the series as you read it,
and right means the very end.
Don't mix them up or you'll
be counting backwards.
And as I mentioned before.
Learn alphabetical positions.
Knowing the forward and backward
positions of letters, perhaps
using our EJ OT trick, drastically
speeds up letter based questions.
It's like having a superpower.
Also, always consider option elimination.
Sometimes even if you can't fully
solve the problem in your head, a
quick observation of the pattern or
the nature of the question can help
you eliminate incorrect options.
It narrows down your choices, making
your educated guests much more powerful,
and finally, practice with timers.
Regular practice under timed
conditions is your secret source.
It helps improve both speed
and accuracy, making pattern
recognition almost instinctive.
You'll be spotting patterns
faster than a hawk.
Spotting it, spray common
mistakes and misconceptions.
All right.
Let's talk about the potholes
on this road, the common
mistakes we need to avoid.
The number one culprit is counting errors.
This is the most frequent
mistake, especially when asked
for elements between, remember
exclusive counting or when the
series itself is long and winding.
Be meticulous.
Then there's directional confusion mixing
up left to right and right to left.
Counting is a classic or failing to
switch directions when the question
specifically demands it like fourth to
the right of the fifth from the left.
Pay attention to those
prepositions my friend.
Another one is ignoring element types.
Sometimes friends overlook symbols
or specific types of elements,
like just letters or just numbers.
When the question actually applies to
all of them, read the question fully.
Don't skim, and please don't fall into
the trap of assuming simple patterns,
never Just verify the identified pattern
for the first two or three terms.
You must verify it
across the entire series.
Sometimes patterns can change
or they can be much more complex
than you initially perceived.
They love to trick you like that.
Also, a common misinterpretation is
for immediately proceeded or followed.
Forgetting that immediately means
directly next to without any other element
in between can throw off your count.
No spacing in between.
Understood.
And finally, a simple yet powerful
tip, not rereading the question after
you think you've solved it quickly
reread the question one last time.
To ensure your answer directly
addresses exactly what was asked.
A quick check can save
you from a silly mistake.
W Edge framework summary.
Let's quickly summarize this whole concept
using our trusty WH framework, shall we?
So what is alphabetical series?
It's a sequence composed of
letters, numbers, and symbols
arranged in a logical manner.
And why do we learn it?
It's essential for assessing logical
reasoning, observation skills, and
of course, pattern recognition.
Very important.
When is it applied?
It's applied in competitive
exam reasoning sections to solve
sequential pattern problems.
Where can you find these questions?
They're commonly found in various
government and banking entrance exams.
Who needs to study this?
Well, you, my friend, and all
candidates appearing for competitive
exams, particularly in the banking
and civil services sectors.
And finally, how do we solve them?
By identifying the underlying
rule of arrangement, counting
positions or recognizing numerical
or alphabetical progressions.
Simple, isn't it?
Fully worked out examples.
Now for the fun part, let's look
at some fully worked out examples.
This is where the rubber
meets the road as they say.
Example, one question.
Study the following arrangement carefully
and answer the questions given below.
R four TJ two at the rate MD six P, a
8% KL nine E, dollar Q3 HI seven UN five
W. How many such numbers are there in
the given arrangement, each of which
is immediately proceeded by a letter
and immediately followed by a symbol?
Options A one B2C 3D four.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution, step one.
First things first, my friend,
understand the condition clearly.
We need to find sequences that
perfectly fit the pattern.
Letter number symbol, no
compromises, no exceptions.
Step two, now scan the given
arrangement with a hawk's eye and
locate all the numbers we have.
4, 2, 6, 8, 9, 3, 7, 5. Keep them in mind.
Step three, time for the real work.
Let's check each number in the series for
our letter number symbol pattern four.
Four.
We see.
R Letter four, T letter.
Hmm, doesn't fit our criteria.
T is a letter, not a symbol for two.
Aha.
We have J. Letter two.
Add the rate symbol.
Bingo.
This fits perfectly.
J two add is a first find for six.
Next is hash symbol six P letter.
Nope, it's proceeded by
a symbol, not a letter.
Doesn't fit.
Four, eight.
Look here a letter.
8% symbol.
Yes, this fits too.
A 8% is a second find four, nine.
We have a letter.
Nine, E letter.
Another Miss E is a letter.
Four, three Q letter.
Three.
H letter.
Sadly, another Miss H
is a letter four, seven.
And here we go.
I letter seven star symbol.
Fantastic.
This fits a pattern I seven
at is a third find four, five.
Finally, end letter five W. Nope.
W is a letter doesn't fit.
Step four.
Now let's count the sequences
that proudly fit a pattern.
We found three such numbers.
Two in J two at eight in a
8%, and seven in I seven star.
So the correct answer my friend is C3.
Well done.
Example two question.
If all the symbols are dropped
from the above arrangement, which
of the following will be the
12th element from the right end?
R. Four.
TJ two add the rate MD six PA 8% KL nine
E dollar Q3 HI seven UN five W options.
A K, BLC nine.
D. E. Understand the question before
moving to explanation solution.
Step one first, understand
the instruction carefully.
The question wants us to first remove all
symbols from the original arrangement.
This is a transformation step.
Remember, original series
R four TJ two at the rate.
MD six PA 8% KL nine E, dollar Q3
HI seven star UN five W, step two.
Now let's create our new series by
playing Hide and seek With all the
symbols, add the rate hash percent,
dollar star, we'll eliminate them.
New series.
R four D, J two M, D six P, a
eight K, L nine EQ three HI seven
UN five W. See much cleaner.
Step three.
Next, identify the right end
of this newly formed series.
Looking at it, the right most element
is clearly W. That's our starting
point for counting step four.
Now the task is to count the 12th element.
We start from the right end W and move
towards the left in our new symbol.
Free series, first element
W, second element five.
Third element N, fourth element U,
fifth element seven, sixth element I,
seventh element H, eighth element three.
Ninth element Q, 10th Element.
E. 11th element nine, 12th
Element L. There you have it.
The 12th element from the right end in
our modified series is L. Step five.
The correct answer is BL. Simple as that.
When you follow the steps, example three.
Question, what should come in the
place of question mark in the following
series based on the above arrangement?
Four J, D six, eight K question mark
N five R four TJ two at the rate MD
six P. A 8% KL nine E, dollar Q3 HI
seven, star U and five W options.
A-E-Q-B-Q three C nine QDE three.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution, step one.
Let's dissect the pattern, my friend.
We need to analyze the pattern
for the first elements of each
pair in the given sequence.
That's four D eight question
mark N relative to their original
positions in the main arrangement.
Let's jot down the positions
one based index of these first
elements from the main series.
Four is at position two,
D is at position eight.
Now what's the jump from four to D?
That's eight minus two,
which is six positions.
Got it.
Eight.
Is that position?
13? What's the jump from D to eight?
That's 13 minus eight,
which is five positions.
Step two.
All right.
Now observe the pattern of these
jumps between the first elements.
We had a jump of six, then a jump of five.
See it.
The jumps are decreasing by one
following this delightful pattern.
The next jump should be four positions.
So the position of the first element
of our missing pair will be 13.
Current position of eight plus four.
That makes it 17.
Now looking at the main series,
which element is happily
sitting at the 17th position?
It's nine.
Therefore, we've nailed the first
element of the missing pair.
It's nine step three.
Now for the second element of the pair,
since we firmly established that the
first element is nine, let's speak at
the options option C nine Q is the.
Only one that starts with nine.
That's a huge hint, isn't it?
But let's verify how Q relates
to nine in the main series.
Just to be sure.
In our main series, around
nine L nine E dollar.
Q3 H and so on.
Nine is at position 17,
Q is at position 20.
Between nine and Q, we have E and dollar.
This means Q is the third
element to the right of nine.
We are skipping two
elements, E and dollar.
Now you might notice that the
previous pairs four JD six,
eight K showed the second element
being two positions to the right.
Skipping one element.
But my friend in competitive
exams, sometimes these patterns can
cleverly shift or apply specifically
to a certain part of the series.
Given that nine is strongly
established as the first element
and nine Q is a clear option, this
indicates the intended internal
relationship for this specific pair.
So we trust our deduction and the option
given step four, combine our deduced first
element and the verified second element.
The missing pair is indeed nine Q.
Correct answer is C nine Q and that
my friend, is how you decode these.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.